Present continuous (I am doing)

Study this example situation:
Sarah is in her car. She is on her way to work.
She’s driving to work. (= She is driving …)

This means: she is driving now, at the time of speaking.
The action is not finished.
I am doing something = I started doing it and I haven’t finished; I’m in the middle of doing it.
Please don’t make so much noise. I’m trying to work. (not I try)
‘Where’s Mark?’ ‘He’s having a shower.’ (not He has a shower)
Let’s go out now. It isn’t raining any more. (not It doesn’t rain)
How’s your new job? Are you enjoying it?
What’s all that noise? What’s going on? or What’s happening?

Sometimes the action is not happening at the time of speaking.
Kate wants to work in Italy, so she’s learning Italian.
(but perhaps she isn’t learning Italian at the time of speaking)
Some friends of mine are building their own house. They hope to finish it next summer.

You can use the present continuous with today / this week / this year etc. (periods around now):
a: You’re working hard today. (not You work hard today)
b: Yes, I have a lot to do.
The company I work for isn’t doing so well this year.

We use the present continuous when we talk about a change that has started to happen. We oft en use
these verbs in this way:
getting, becoming changing, improving
 starting, beginning increasing, rising, falling, growing
Is your English getting better? (not Does your English get better)
The population of the world is increasing very fast. (not increases)
At first I didn’t like my job, but I’m starting to enjoy it now. (not I start)

Present simple (I do)

Study this example situation:
Alex is a bus driver, but now he is in bed asleep.
He is not driving a bus. (He is asleep.)
but He drives a bus. He is a bus driver.
drive(s), work(s), do(es) etc.

We use the present simple to talk about things in general. We use it to say that something happens all the
time or repeatedly, or that something is true in general:
Nurses look aft er patients in hospitals.
I usually go away at weekends.
The earth goes round the sun.
The cafe opens at 7.30 in the morning.

We use do/does to make questions and negative sentences:
I come from Canada. Where do you come from?
I don’t go away very oft en.
What does this word mean? (not What means this word?)
Rice doesn’t grow in cold climates.
In the following examples, do is also the main verb (do you do / doesn’t do etc.):
‘What do you do?’ ‘I work in a shop.’
He’s always so lazy. He doesn’t do anything to help.

We use the present simple to say how oft en we do things:
I get up at 8 o’clock every morning.
How oft en do you go to the dentist?
Julie doesn’t drink tea very oft en.
Robert usually goes away two or three times a year.

I promise / I apologise etc.
Sometimes we do things by saying something. For example, when you promise to do something,
you can say ‘I promise … ’; when you suggest something, you can say ‘I suggest … ’:
I promise I won’t be late. (not I’m promising)
‘What do you suggest I do?’ ‘I suggest that you …’
In the same way we say: I apologise … / I advise … / I insist … / I agree … / I refuse … etc.

Present continuous and present simple 1
(I am doing and I do)

present continuous (I am doing)
We use the continuous for things happening at
or around the time of speaking.
The action is not complete.

present simple (I do)
We use the simple for things in general or things
that happen repeatedly.

I always do and I’m always doing
I always do something = I do it every time:
I always go to work by car. (not I’m always going)
I’m always doing something = I do it too oft en or more oft en than normal.
For example:
B
I’m always losing them = I lose them too oft en,
or more oft en than normal.
Paul is never satisfied. He’s always complaining. (= he complains too much)
You’re always looking at your phone. Don’t you have anything else to do?

Present continuous and present simple 2
(I am doing and I do)
We use continuous forms (I’m waiting, it’s raining etc.) for actions and happenings that have started but
not finished.
Some verbs (for example, know and like) are not normally used in this way. We don’t say ‘I am knowing’,
‘they are liking’. We say ‘I know’, ‘they like’.
think
When think means ‘believe’ or ‘have an opinion’, we do not use the continuous:
I think Mary is Canadian, but I’m not sure. (not I’m thinking)
What do you think of my idea? (= what is your opinion?)
When think means ‘consider’, the continuous is possible:
I’m thinking about what happened. I often think about it.
Nicky is thinking of giving up her job. (= she is considering it)
see hear smell taste look feel
We normally use the present simple (not continuous) with see/hear/smell/taste:
Do you see that man over there? (not are you seeing)
The room smells. Let’s open a window.
This soup doesn’t taste very good.
You can use the present simple or continuous to say how somebody looks or feels now:
You look well today. or You’re looking well today.
How do you feel now? or How are you feeling now?
but
I usually feel tired in the morning. (not I’m usually feeling)
am/is/are being
You can say he’s being … , you’re being … etc. to say how somebody is behaving now:
I can’t understand why he’s being so selfish. He isn’t usually like that.
(being selfish = behaving selfishly now)
‘The path is icy. Don’t slip.’ ‘Don’t worry. I’m being very careful.’
Compare:
He never thinks about other people. He’s very selfish.
(= he is selfish generally, not only now)
I don’t like to take risks. I’m a very careful person.
We use am/is/are being to say how a person is behaving (= doing something they can control) now.
It is not usually possible in other situations:
Sam is ill. (not is being ill)
Are you tired? (not are you being tired)




